# VT-d 101

## DMA Remapping

**domains**: abstract isolated environments in the platform, which is a subset of host physical  memory is allocated.

DMA remapping provides hardware support for isolation of device accesses to memory, and enables each device in the system to be assigned to a `specific domain` through a distinct set of paging structures. And this can be use for implement `DMA Isolation`:

* DMA Isolation: An OS may manage I/O by creating multiple domains and assigning one or more devices to each domain. Each device-driver explicitly its I/O buffers with the OS, and the OS assigns these I/O buffers to specific domains, using hardware to enforce DMA domain protection.

To support direct assignment of I/O devices, a VMM must enforce isolation of DMA requests. I/O devices can be assigned to domains, and the remapping hardware can be used to restrict DMA from an I/O device to the physical memory presently owned by its domain.

VMM set Write-protect is related to the DMA remapping usages by Guests. The detail please refer VT-d spec 2.5.1.3 DMA Remapping Usages by Guests.

The remapping hardware is implemented in Root-Complex components, such as the memory controller hub (MCH) or I/O hub (IOH).



### Types of DMA requests

Memory requests from root-complex integrated devices and PCI-Express attached discrete (离散) devices are divide into two categories:

* Requests without address-space-identifier: These are normal memory requests from endpoint devices.
* Requests with address-space-identifier: These are memory requests with additional information identifying the targeted process address space from endpoint devices supporting virtual memory capabilities. These requests specify the targeted process address space identifier (PASID).

### Domains and Address Translation

I/O devices that are allowed to access physical memory directly are allocated to a domain and are referred to as the domain's assigned devices. For virtualization usages, software may treat each virtual machine as a separate domain.

Remapping hardware treats the address in inbound requests as DMA address. Depending on the software usage model, The DMA address space can be:

* Guest-Physical Address (GPA) of the virtual machine to which the device is assigned.
* Application Virtual Address (VA) defined by the PASID assigned to an application.
* Some abstract I/O virtual address (IOVA) defined by software.

In all cases, DMA remapping transforms the address in a DMA request issued by an I/O device to its corresponding Host-Physical Address (HPA).

### Mapping Devices to Domains

#### Source Identifier

For PCI-Express devices, the souce-id is the PCI Bus/Device/Function number.

#### Root-Entry & Extended-Root-Entry

The root-table functions as top level structure to map devices to their respective domains. The location of the root-table in system memory is programmed through the `Root Table Address Register`. The root-table is 4-KByte in size and contains 256 root-entries to cover the PCI bus number space (0-255). The bus number (upper-8-bits) is used to index the root-entry structure.

Each root-entry contains the following fields:

* **Present flag**: The present field indicates the root-entry is present and the context-table pointer field is initialized.
* **Context-table pointer**: The context-table pointer references the context-table for devices on the bus identified by the root-entry.

#### Context-Entry

A context-entry maps a specific I/O device on a bus to the domain which it's assigned. The device and function numbers (lower 8-bits) are used to index the context-table. Each context entries are point to the address translation structures for the domain.

The Context-entries support only requests-without-PASID, and contains the following fields:

* **Present Flag**.
* **Translation Type**: The translation-type field indicates `what types of requests` are `allowed` through the context-entry, and the type of the address translation that must be used for such requests.
* **Address Width**: Indicates the address-width of the domain which the device corresponding to.
* **Second-level Page-table Pointer**: 
* **Domain Identifier**: The domain-identifier is software-assigned, and used to identifies the domain. Hardware may use this field to tag its caching structures. Context entries programmed with the same domain identifier must reference the same address translation structure. 
* **Address Space Root:** The address-space-root field provides the host physical address of the address translation structure in memory to be used for address-translating DMA requests processed through the context-entry.
* **Fault Processing Disable Flag**: Enables software to selectively disable reporting of remapping faults.

### Hierarchical Translation structures

DMA remapping uses hierarchical translation structures for both `first-level translation`(for requests-with-PASID) and second-level translation (for requests-without-PASID and for nested translation of requests-with-PASID).

For requests-without-PASID, the DMA-address in the request is used as the input address of second-level translation.

For requests-with-PASID, the DMA-address in the request is used as first-level translation and the output address of first-level translation is used as the input address of the second-level translation.

### First-Level Translation

### Second-Level Translation



## Interrupt Remapping

The VMM can utilize the interrupt-remapping hardware to improve the isolation of external interrupt requests `across domains`. The VMM can distinguish interrupt requests from specific devices and route them to appropriate VMs to which the respective devices are assigned.