# 3. Page Table Management

The types of pages is very blurry(模糊的), and page types are identified by their flags or what lists they exist on rather than the objects they belong to.

## 1. Describing the Page Directory

Each process is a pointer (mm_struct->pgd) to its own PGD which is physical page frame. This frame contains an array of type pgd_t.

On the x86, the process page table is loaded by copying `mm_struct->pgd` into the cr3 register, which has the side effect of flushing the TLB.

Here are a number of the protection and status bits listed in below:

| Bit            | Function                                        |
| -------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| _PAGE_PRESENT  | Page is resident in memory and not swapped out. |
| _PAGE_PROTNONE | Page is resident, but not accessible.           |
| _PAGE_RW       | Set if the page may be written to               |
| _PAGE_USER     | Set if the page is accessible from userspace    |
| _PAGE_DIRTY    | Set if the page is written to                   |
| _PAGE_ACCESSED | Set if the page is accessed                     |

These bits are self-explanatory except `_PAGE_PROTNONE` which is a little confusing. This bit is needed for having a page resident in memory but inaccessible to the user space process.

Such as when a region is protected with `mprotect()` with the `PROT_NONE` flag. When the region is to be protected, the `_PAGE_PRESENT` bit is cleared, and the `_PAGE_PROTNONE` bit is set. The macro `pte_present()` checks if either of these bits are set, so the kernel itself knows the PTE is present. It is just inaccessible to userspace, which is subtle(微妙的). Because the hardware bit `_PAGE_PRESENT` is clear, a page fault will occur if the page is accessed so that Linux can enforce the protection while still knowing the page is resident if it needs to swap it out or the process exits.

## 2. Using Page Table Entries

There has a very simple function `follow_page()` which can be used to learn how to operate the page table entries. Below is an excerpt(摘抄) from that function.

```C
void follow_page()
{
    pgd_t *pgd;
    pmd_t *pmd;
    pte_t *ptep, pte;
    
    pgd = pgd_offset(mm, address);
    if (pgd_none(*pgd) || pgd_bad(*pgd))
        goto out;
    
    pmd = pmd_offset(pgd, address);
    if (pmd_none(*pmd) || pmd_bad(*pmd))
        goto out;
    
    ptep = pte_offset(pmd, address);
    if (!ptep)
        goto out;
    
    pte = *ptep;
}
```

* `p*d_none()` return 1 if the corresponding entry does not exist.
* `pte/pmd/pgd_present()` return 1 if the corresponding page table entries have the `PRESENT` bit set.
* `pte/pmd/pgd_clear()` will clear the corresponding page table entry.
* `pmd_bad()` and `pgd_bad()` are used to check entries when passed as input parameters to functions that may change the value of the entries. Making sure the page entry is marked as present and accessed are the two most important checks.

There are set of macros examine and set the permissions of an entry.

* Read permissions for an entry: tested with `pte_read()`, set with `pte_mkread()` and cleared with `pte_rdprotect()`.
* Write permission: tested with `pte_write()`, set with `pte_mkwrite()` and cleared with `pte_wrprotect()`.
* Execute permissions: tested `pte_exec()`, set with `pte_mkexec()` and cleared with `pte_exprotect()`. 

There are set of macros examine and set the state of an entry. The dirty bit and the accessed bit.

* Check these bits: `pte_dirty()` and `pte_young()`.
* Set these bits: `pte_mkdirty()` and `pte_mkyoung()`.
* Clear them: `pte_mkclean()` and `pte_old()`.

## 3. Translating and Setting Page Table Entries

* `mk_pte()` takes a `struct page` and protection bits and combines them together to form the `pte_t` that needs to be inserted into page table.
* `mk_pte_phys()` takes a physical page address as a parameter.
* `pte_page()` returns the struct page, which corresponds to the PTE entry. `pmd_page()` returns the struct page containing the set of PTEs.
* `set_pte()` takes a `pte_t` such as that returned by `mk_pte()` and places it within the process's page table. `pte_clear()` is the reverse operation.
* `ptep_get_and_clear()` which clears an entry from the process page table and returns the `pte_t`.

## 4. Allocating and Freeing Page Tables

The allocation and deletion of page tables, at any of the three levels, is a very frequent operation, so it is important the operation is as quick as possible.

Hence the pages used for the page tables are cached in a number of different lists called `quicklists`. Except the PGD, because the allocation and freeing of them only happens during process creation and exit. Both of these are very expensive operations, the allocation of another page is negligible(微不足道的).

## 5. Kernel Page Tables

In x86, the bootstrap phase sets up page tables for just 8MB so that the paging unit can be enabled. The second phase initializes the rest of the page tables.

All normal kernel code in vmlinux is compiled with the base address at `PAGE_OFFSET + 1MB`, the kernel is actually loaded beginning at the 1MB (0x00100000) of memory. The first megabyte is used by some devices for communication with the BIOS and is skipped.

### 6. The fixrange vaddr

The `fixed address space mappings` are used for purpose such as local APIC.

Here is some definition of the fixed range mappings, there are defined as some index. And they define all the compile-time `special` virtual addresses. The point is to have a constant address at compile time. One of them will occupy a PAGE.

```C
enum fixed_addresses {
#ifdef CONFIG_X86_LOCAL_APIC
	FIX_APIC_BASE,	/* local (CPU) APIC) -- required for SMP or not */
#endif
#ifdef CONFIG_X86_IO_APIC
	FIX_IO_APIC_BASE_0,
	FIX_IO_APIC_BASE_END = FIX_IO_APIC_BASE_0 + MAX_IO_APICS-1,
#endif
#ifdef CONFIG_X86_VISWS_APIC
	FIX_CO_CPU,	/* Cobalt timer */
	FIX_CO_APIC,	/* Cobalt APIC Redirection Table */
	FIX_LI_PCIA,	/* Lithium PCI Bridge A */
	FIX_LI_PCIB,	/* Lithium PCI Bridge B */
#endif
#ifndef CONFIG_X86_F00F_WORKS_OK
	FIX_F00F,
#endif
#ifdef CONFIG_X86_SUMMIT
	FIX_CYCLONE_TIMER, /*cyclone timer register*/
#endif 
#ifdef CONFIG_HIGHMEM
	FIX_KMAP_BEGIN,	/* reserved pte's for temporary kernel mappings */
	FIX_KMAP_END = FIX_KMAP_BEGIN+(KM_TYPE_NR*NR_CPUS)-1,
#endif
#ifdef CONFIG_ACPI_BOOT
	FIX_ACPI_BEGIN,
	FIX_ACPI_END = FIX_ACPI_BEGIN + FIX_ACPI_PAGES - 1,
#endif
	__end_of_permanent_fixed_addresses,
	/* temporary boot-time mappings, used before ioremap() is functional */
#define NR_FIX_BTMAPS	16
	FIX_BTMAP_END = __end_of_permanent_fixed_addresses,
	FIX_BTMAP_BEGIN = FIX_BTMAP_END + NR_FIX_BTMAPS - 1,
	__end_of_fixed_addresses
};
```

The fixed virtual mapping is located at the end of the virtual memory space. Like in `i386`, it locate at:

```C
#define FIXADDR_TOP	(0xffffe000UL)
```

And the fixed mapping size is calculated by:

```C
#define __FIXADDR_SIZE	(__end_of_permanent_fixed_addresses << PAGE_SHIFT)
#define FIXADDR_START	(FIXADDR_TOP - __FIXADDR_SIZE)
```

And how to get the virtual address by using the index?

```C
#define __fix_to_virt(x)	(FIXADDR_TOP - ((x) << PAGE_SHIFT))
```

Like `__fix_to_virt(FIX_APIC_BASE)` will calculate the virtual address of the fixed mapping.

## Functions

### Page Table Walking

#### Function: follow_page() (mm/memory.c)

This function returns the struct page used by the PTE at address in mm's pagetables.

